Pride and Prejudice
by Jane Austen


Chapter 3
Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked him in various ways—with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all, and they were at last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour, Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. Sir William had been delighted with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly with a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To be fond of dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively hopes of Mr. Bingley’s heart were entertained. “If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,” said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, “and all the others equally well married, I shall have nothing to wish for.”
In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet’s visit, and sat about ten minutes with him in his library. He had entertained hopes of being admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had heard much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat more fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper window that he wore a blue coat, and rode a black horse.
An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched; and already had Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr. Bingley was obliged to be in town the following day, and, consequently, unable to accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was quite disconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have in town so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear that he might be always flying about from one place to another, and never settled at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her fears a little by starting the idea of his being gone to London only to get a large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that Mr. Bingley was to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with him to the assembly. The girls grieved over such a number of ladies, but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing, that instead of twelve he brought only six with him from London—his five sisters and a cousin.
And when the party entered the assembly room it consisted of only five altogether—Mr. Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and another young man. Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike; he had a pleasant countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women, with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, and the report which was in general circulation within five minutes after his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared he was much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with great admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be proud; to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not all his large estate in Derbyshire could then save him from having a most forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared with his friend. Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal people in the room; he was lively and unreserved, danced every
dance, was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak for themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy danced only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined being introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party. 
His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man
in the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there
again. Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose
dislike of his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by his having slighted one of her daughters.
Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had
been standing near enough for her to hear a conversation between him
and Mr. Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes, to press
his friend to join it.
“Come, Darcy,” said he, “I must have you dance. I hate to see you
standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. You had much better
dance.”
“I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I am particularly acquainted with my partner. At such an assembly as this it
would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is not another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me
to stand up with.”
“I would not be so fastidious as you are,” cried Mr. Bingley, “for a
kingdom! Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls
in my life as I have this evening; and there are several of them you see
uncommonly pretty.”
“You are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room,” said
Mr. Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet.
“Oh! She is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! But there is
one of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and
I dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.”
“Which do you mean?” and turning round he looked for a moment
at Elizabeth, till catching her eye, he withdrew his own and coldly said:
“She is tolerable, but not handsome enough to tempt me; I am in no humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted
by other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy her
smiles, for you are wasting your time with me.”
Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth remained with no very cordial feelings toward him. She told the
story, however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively,
playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous.
The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs. Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the
Netherfield party. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had
been distinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this
as her mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane’s
pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the
most accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been fortunate enough never to be without partners, which
was all that they had yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned,
therefore, in good spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. With a book he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a good deal of curiosity as to the events of an evening which had raised such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that his wife’s views on the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found out that he had a different story to hear.
“Oh! my dear Mr. Bennet,” as she entered the room, “we have had
a most delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been
there. Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said
how well she looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and
danced with her twice! Only think of that, my dear; he actually danced
with her twice! and she was the only creature in the room that he asked
a second time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see
him stand up with her! But, however, he did not admire her at all;
indeed, nobody can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane
as she was going down the dance. So he inquired who she was, and
got introduced, and asked her for the two next. Then the two third
he danced with Miss King, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and
the two fifth with Jane again, and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the
Boulanger—”
“If he had had any compassion for me,” cried her husband impatiently, “he would not have danced half so much! For God’s sake, say
no more of his partners. O that he had sprained his ankle in the first
place!”
“Oh! my dear, I am quite delighted with him. He is so excessively
handsome! And his sisters are charming women. I never in my life
saw anything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the lace upon
Mrs. Hurst’s gown—”
Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet protested against any
description of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch
of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit and some
exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy.
“But I can assure you,” she added, “that Lizzy does not lose much
by not suiting his fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not
at all worth pleasing. So high and so conceited that there was no enduring him! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so
very great! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been
there, my dear, to have given him one of your set-downs. I quite detest
the man.”


Chapter 5
Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the
Bennets were particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and
risen to the honour of knighthood by an address to the king during
his mayoralty. The distinction had perhaps been felt too strongly. It
had given him a disgust to his business, and to his residence in a small
market town; and, in quitting them both, he had removed with his
family to a house about a mile from Meryton, denominated from that
period Lucas Lodge, where he could think with pleasure of his own
importance, and, unshackled by business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all the world. For, though elated by his rank, it did not
render him supercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By nature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, his presentation at
St. James’s had made him courteous.
Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a
valuable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet. They had several children. The eldest of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven,
was Elizabeth’s intimate friend.
That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk
over a ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate.


“You began the evening well, Charlotte,” said Mrs. Bennet with civil
self-command to Miss Lucas. “You were Mr. Bingley’s first choice.”
“Yes; but he seemed to like his second better.”
“Oh! you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice.
To be sure that did seem as if he admired her—indeed I rather believe he
did—I heard something about it—but I hardly know what—something
about Mr. Robinson.”
“Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson; did not I mention it to you? Mr. Robinson’s asking him how he
liked our Meryton assemblies, and whether he did not think there were
a great many pretty women in the room, and which he thought the prettiest? and his answering immediately to the last question: ‘Oh! the
eldest Miss Bennet, beyond a doubt; there cannot be two opinions on
that point.’ ”
“Upon my word! Well, that is very decided indeed—that does seem
as if—but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know.”
“My overhearings were more to the purpose than yours, Eliza,” said
Charlotte. “Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend, is
he?—poor Eliza!—to be only just tolerable.”
“I beg you would not put it into Lizzy’s head to be vexed by his
ill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man, that it would be quite
a misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that he
sat close to her for half-an-hour without once opening his lips.”
“Are you quite sure, ma’am?—is not there a little mistake?” said
Jane. “I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to her.”
“Aye—because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and
he could not help answering her; but she said he seemed quite angry
at being spoke to.”
“Miss Bingley told me,” said Jane, “that he never speaks much, unless among his intimate acquaintances. With them he is remarkably
agreeable.”
“I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so very
agreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how
it was; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he
had heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had
come to the ball in a hack chaise.”
“I do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Long,” said Miss Lucas, “but
I wish he had danced with Eliza.”
“Another time, Lizzy,” said her mother, “I would not dance with
him, if I were you.”
“I believe, ma’am, I may safely promise you never to dance with
him.”
“His pride,” said Miss Lucas, “does not offend me so much as pride
often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so
very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour,
should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a right to
be proud.”
“That is very true,” replied Elizabeth, “and I could easily forgive
his pride, if he had not mortified mine.”
“Pride,” observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of
her reflections, “is a very common failing, I believe. By all that I have
ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed; that human
nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us who
do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different things,
though the words are often used synonymously. A person may be
proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of ourselves, vanity to what we would have others think of us.”
“If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy,” cried a young Lucas, who came
with his sisters, “I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a
pack of foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine a day.”
“Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought,” said
Mrs. Bennet; “and if I were to see you at it, I should take away your
bottle directly.”
The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that
she would, and the argument ended only with the visit.


Chapter 7
Mr. Bennet’s property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two
thousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters, was entailed,


in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother’s fortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill supply the
deficiency of his. Her father had been an attorney in Meryton, and had
left her four thousand pounds.
She had a sister married to a Mr. Phillips, who had been a clerk to
their father and succeeded him in the business, and a brother settled in
London in a respectable line of trade.
The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a most
convenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually tempted
thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt and
to a milliner’s shop just over the way. The two youngest of the family, Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions;
their minds were more vacant than their sisters’, and when nothing
better offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morning hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and however bare
of news the country in general might be, they always contrived to learn
some from their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both
with news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in
the neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton
was the headquarters.
Their visits to Mrs. Phillips were now productive of the most interesting intelligence. Every day added something to their knowledge of
the officers’ names and connections. Their lodgings were not long a
secret, and at length they began to know the officers themselves. Mr.
Phillips visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a store of felicity unknown before. They could talk of nothing but officers; and Mr.
Bingley’s large fortune, the mention of which gave animation to their
mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the regimentals
of an ensign.
After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Mr.
Bennet coolly observed:
“From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be
two of the silliest girls in the country. I have suspected it some time,
but I am now convinced.”
Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with
perfect indifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain
Carter, and her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was
going the next morning to London.
“I am astonished, my dear,” said Mrs. Bennet, “that you should be
so ready to think your own children silly. If I wished to think slightingly of anybody’s children, it should not be of my own, however.”

“If my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it.”
“Yes—but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.”
“This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree.
I had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I
must so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters
uncommonly foolish.”
“My dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the
sense of their father and mother. When they get to our age, I dare say
they will not think about officers any more than we do. I remember the
time when I liked a red coat myself very well—and, indeed, so I do still
at my heart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a
year, should want one of my girls I shall not say nay to him; and I
thought Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir
William’s in his regimentals.”
“Mamma,” cried Lydia, “my aunt says that Colonel Forster and
Captain Carter do not go so often to Miss Watson’s as they did when
they first came; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke’s library.”
Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman
with a note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant
waited for an answer. Mrs. Bennet’s eyes sparkled with pleasure, and
she was eagerly calling out, while her daughter read,
“Well, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does he say?
Well, Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love.”
“It is from Miss Bingley,” said Jane, and then read it aloud.
“My dear friend,—
“If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and
me, we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives,
for a whole day’s tête-à-tête between two women can never end without a quarrel. Come as soon as you can on receipt of this. My brother
and the gentlemen are to dine with the officers.—Yours ever,
“Caroline Bingley”
“With the officers!” cried Lydia. “I wonder my aunt did not tell us
of that.”
“Dining out,” said Mrs. Bennet, “that is very unlucky.”
“Can I have the carriage?” said Jane.
“No, my dear, you had better go on horseback, because it seems
likely to rain; and then you must stay all night.”
“That would be a good scheme,” said Elizabeth, “if you were sure
that they would not offer to send her home.”
“Oh! but the gentlemen will have Mr. Bingley’s chaise to go to
Meryton, and the Hursts have no horses to theirs.”
“I had much rather go in the coach.”
“But, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, I am sure. They
are wanted in the farm, Mr. Bennet, are they not?”
“They are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them.”
“But if you have got them to-day,” said Elizabeth, “my mother’s
purpose will be answered.”
She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the
horses were engaged. Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback,
and her mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a bad day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone
long before it rained hard. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her
mother was delighted. The rain continued the whole evening without
intermission; Jane certainly could not come back.
“This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!” said Mrs. Bennet more
than once, as if the credit of making it rain were all her own. Till the
next morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her contrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield
brought the following note for Elizabeth:
“My dearest Lizzy,—
“I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to be
imputed to my getting wet through yesterday. My kind friends will not
hear of my returning till I am better. They insist also on my seeing Mr.
Jones—therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear of his having
been to me—and, excepting a sore throat and headache, there is not
much the matter with me.—Yours, etc.”
“Well, my dear,” said Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the note
aloud, “if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness—if she
should die, it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of
Mr. Bingley, and under your orders.”
“Oh! I am not afraid of her dying. People do not die of little trifling
colds. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays there, it is
all very well. I would go and see her if I could have the carriage.”
Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, was determined to go to her,
though the carriage was not to be had; and as she was no horsewoman,
walking was her only alternative. She declared her resolution.

“How can you be so silly,” cried her mother, “as to think of such a
thing, in all this dirt! You will not be fit to be seen when you get there.”
“I shall be very fit to see Jane—which is all I want.”
“Is this a hint to me, Lizzy,” said her father, “to send for the horses?”
“No, indeed, I do not wish to avoid the walk. The distance is nothing when one has a motive; only three miles. I shall be back by dinner.”
“I admire the activity of your benevolence,” observed Mary, “but
every impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion, exertion should always be in proportion to what is required.”
“We will go as far as Meryton with you,” said Catherine and Lydia.
Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set off
together.
“If we make haste,” said Lydia, as they walked along, “perhaps we
may see something of Captain Carter before he goes.”
In Meryton they parted; the two youngest repaired to the lodgings
of one of the officers’ wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone,
crossing field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing over puddles with impatient activity, and finding herself at last
within view of the house, with weary ankles, dirty stockings, and a
face glowing with the warmth of exercise.
She was shown into the breakfast-parlour, where all but Jane were
assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise.
That she should have walked three miles so early in the day, in such
dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst and
Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt for it. She was received, however, very politely by them; and
in their brother’s manners there was something better than politeness;
there was good humour and kindness. Mr. Darcy said very little, and
Mr. Hurst nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of the brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion, and
doubt as to the occasion’s justifying her coming so far alone. The latter
was thinking only of his breakfast.
Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered.
Miss Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and not
well enough to leave her room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her
immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving alarm or inconvenience from expressing in her note how much
she longed for such a visit, was delighted at her entrance. She was
not equal, however, to much conversation, and when Miss Bingley left
them together, could attempt little besides expressions of gratitude for
the extraordinary kindness she was treated with. Elizabeth silently at-

tended her.
When breakfast was over they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and
solicitude they showed for Jane. The apothecary came, and having examined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had caught
a violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it;
advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. The
advice was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and
her head ached acutely. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment;
nor were the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they
had, in fact, nothing to do elsewhere.
When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and
very unwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the carriage, and
she only wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such
concern in parting with her, that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert
the offer of the chaise to an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the
present. Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was dispatched to Longbourn to acquaint the family with her stay and bring
back a supply of clothes.


Chapter 9
Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister’s room, and in
the morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer
to the inquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley by a
housemaid, and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who
waited on his sisters. In spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have a note sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit
Jane, and form her own judgement of her situation. The note was immediately dispatched, and its contents as quickly complied with. Mrs.
Bennet, accompanied by her two youngest girls, reached Netherfield
soon after the family breakfast.
Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would
have been very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her
illness was not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her restoration to health would probably remove her from
Netherfield. She would not listen, therefore, to her daughter’s proposal of being carried home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived
about the same time, think it at all advisable. After sitting a little while
with Jane, on Miss Bingley’s appearance and invitation, the mother and
three daughter all attended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met
them with hopes that Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse
than she expected.
“Indeed I have, sir,” was her answer. “She is a great deal too ill to
be moved. Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her. We must
trespass a little longer on your kindness.”
“Removed!” cried Bingley. “It must not be thought of. My sister, I
am sure, will not hear of her removal.”
“You may depend upon it, Madam,” said Miss Bingley, with cold
civility, “that Miss Bennet will receive every possible attention while
she remains with us.”
Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments.
28

“I am sure,” she added, “if it was not for such good friends I do not
know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers
a vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is
always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest
temper I have ever met with. I often tell my other girls they are nothing to her. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a charming
prospect over the gravel walk. I do not know a place in the country
that is equal to Netherfield. You will not think of quitting it in a hurry,
I hope, though you have but a short lease.”
“Whatever I do is done in a hurry,” replied he; “and therefore if
I should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five
minutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here.”
“That is exactly what I should have supposed of you,” said Elizabeth.
“You begin to comprehend me, do you?” cried he, turning towards
her.
“Oh! yes—I understand you perfectly.”
“I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen
through I am afraid is pitiful.”
“That is as it happens. It does not follow that a deep, intricate character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours.”
“Lizzy,” cried her mother, “remember where you are, and do not
run on in the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home.”
“I did not know before,” continued Bingley immediately, “that you
were a studier of character. It must be an amusing study.”
“Yes, but intricate characters are the most amusing. They have at
least that advantage.”
“The country,” said Darcy, “can in general supply but a few subjects for such a study. In a country neighbourhood you move in a very
confined and unvarying society.”
“But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new
to be observed in them for ever.”
“Yes, indeed,” cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning a country neighbourhood. “I assure you there is quite as much
of that going on in the country as in town.”
Everybody was surprised, and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment, turned silently away. Mrs. Bennet, who fancied she had gained
a complete victory over him, continued her triumph.
“I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country,
for my part, except the shops and public places. The country is a vast
deal pleasanter, is it not, Mr. Bingley?”

“When I am in the country,” he replied, “I never wish to leave it;
and when I am in town it is pretty much the same. They have each
their advantages, and I can be equally happy in either.”
“Aye—that is because you have the right disposition. But that gentleman,” looking at Darcy, “seemed to think the country was nothing
at all.”
“Indeed, Mamma, you are mistaken,” said Elizabeth, blushing for
her mother. “You quite mistook Mr. Darcy. He only meant that there
was not such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in the
town, which you must acknowledge to be true.”
“Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting
with many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty families.”
Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his
countenance. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eyes towards Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake
of saying something that might turn her mother’s thoughts, now asked
her if Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since her coming away.
“Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man
Sir William is, Mr. Bingley, is not he? So much the man of fashion! So
genteel and easy! He had always something to say to everybody. That
is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves
very important, and never open their mouths, quite mistake the matter.”
“Did Charlotte dine with you?”
“No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mincepies. For my part, Mr. Bingley, I always keep servants that can do their
own work; my daughters are brought up very differently. But everybody is to judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of
girls, I assure you. It is a pity they are not handsome! Not that I think
Charlotte so very plain—but then she is our particular friend.”
“She seems a very pleasant young woman.”
“Oh! dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. Lady Lucas
herself has often said so, and envied me Jane’s beauty. I do not like
to boast of my own child, but to be sure, Jane—one does not often
see anybody better looking. It is what everybody says. I do not trust
my own partiality. When she was only fifteen, there was a man at my
brother Gardiner’s in town so much in love with her that my sister-inlaw was sure he would make her an offer before we came away. But,
however, he did not. Perhaps he thought her too young. However, he
wrote some verses on her, and very pretty they were.”

“And so ended his affection,” said Elizabeth impatiently. “There
has been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder
who first discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!”
“I have been used to consider poetry as the food of love,” said Darcy.
“Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what is
strong already. But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I am
convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away.”
Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made
Elizabeth tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again.
She longed to speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a
short silence Mrs. Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley
for his kindness to Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with
Lizzy. Mr. Bingley was unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced
his younger sister to be civil also, and say what the occasion required.
She performed her part indeed without much graciousness, but Mrs.
Bennet was satisfied, and soon afterwards ordered her carriage. Upon
this signal, the youngest of her daughters put herself forward. The two
girls had been whispering to each other during the whole visit, and the
result of it was, that the youngest should tax Mr. Bingley with having
promised on his first coming into the country to give a ball at Netherfield.
Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion
and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose
affection had brought her into public at an early age. She had high animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the attention
of the officers, to whom her uncle’s good dinners, and her own easy
manners recommended her, had increased into assurance. She was
very equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball,
and abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be
the most shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. His answer
to this sudden attack was delightful to their mother’s ear:
“I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and
when your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very
day of the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing when she is ill.”
Lydia declared herself satisfied. “Oh! yes—it would be much better
to wait till Jane was well, and by that time most likely Captain Carter
would be at Meryton again. And when you have given your ball,” she
added, “I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell Colonel Forster
it will be quite a shame if he does not.” Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations’ behaviour to the remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however, could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of her, in spite of all Miss Bingley’s witticisms on fine eyes.


Chapter 11
When the ladies removed after dinner, Elizabeth ran up to her sister,
and seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into the drawingroom, where she was welcomed by her two friends with many professions of pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable
as they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared. Their powers of conversation were considerable. They could
describe an entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh at their acquaintance with spirit.
But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object;
Miss Bingley’s eyes were instantly turned toward Darcy, and she had
something to say to him before he had advanced many steps. He addressed himself to Miss Bennet, with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst
also made her a slight bow, and said he was “very glad;” but diffuseness and warmth remained for Bingley’s salutation. He was full of joy
and attention. The first half-hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest
she should suffer from the change of room; and she removed at his
desire to the other side of the fireplace, that she might be further from
the door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone else.
Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great delight.
When tea was over, Mr. Hurst reminded his sister-in-law of the
card-table—but in vain. She had obtained private intelligence that Mr.
Darcy did not wish for cards; and Mr. Hurst soon found even his open

petition rejected. She assured him that no one intended to play, and
the silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Mr.
Hurst had therefore nothing to do, but to stretch himself on one of the
sofas and go to sleep. Darcy took up a book; Miss Bingley did the same;
and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupied in playing with her bracelets and
rings, joined now and then in her brother’s conversation with Miss
Bennet.
Miss Bingley’s attention was quite as much engaged in watching
Mr. Darcy’s progress through his book, as in reading her own; and she
was perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page.
She could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her question, and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the
attempt to be amused with her own book, which she had only chosen
because it was the second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and
said, “How pleasant it is to spend an evening in this way! I declare after all there is no enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires
of anything than of a book! When I have a house of my own, I shall be
miserable if I have not an excellent library.”
No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her
book, and cast her eyes round the room in quest for some amusement;
when hearing her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned
suddenly towards him and said:
“By the bye, Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance
at Netherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on it, to
consult the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there
are not some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment
than a pleasure.”
“If you mean Darcy,” cried her brother, “he may go to bed, if he
chooses, before it begins—but as for the ball, it is quite a settled thing;
and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough, I shall send
round my cards.”
“I should like balls infinitely better,” she replied, “if they were carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be much
more rational if conversation instead of dancing were made the order
of the day.”
“Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say, but it would not
be near so much like a ball.”
Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards she got up and
walked about the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well;
but Darcy, at whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. In

the desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more, and,
turning to Elizabeth, said:
“Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example,
and take a turn about the room. I assure you it is very refreshing after
sitting so long in one attitude.”
Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Miss Bingley
succeeded no less in the real object of her civility; Mr. Darcy looked up.
He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as
Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. He was
directly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing that
he could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and
down the room together, with either of which motives his joining them
would interfere. “What could he mean? She was dying to know what
could be his meaning?”—and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all
understand him?
“Not at all,” was her answer; “but depend upon it, he means to be
severe on us, and our surest way of disappointing him will be to ask
nothing about it.”
Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mr. Darcy
in anything, and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation of
his two motives.
“I have not the smallest objection to explaining them,” said he, as
soon as she allowed him to speak. “You either choose this method of
passing the evening because you are in each other’s confidence, and
have secret affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your
figures appear to the greatest advantage in walking; if the first, I would
be completely in your way, and if the second, I can admire you much
better as I sit by the fire.”
“Oh! shocking!” cried Miss Bingley. “I never heard anything so
abominable. How shall we punish him for such a speech?”
“Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination,” said Elizabeth.
“We can all plague and punish one another. Tease him—laugh at him.
Intimate as you are, you must know how it is to be done.”
“But upon my honour, I do not. I do assure you that my intimacy
has not yet taught me that. Tease calmness of manner and presence of
mind! No, no—feel he may defy us there. And as to laughter, we will
not expose ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a
subject. Mr. Darcy may hug himself.”
“Mr. Darcy is not to be laughed at!” cried Elizabeth. “That is an
uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it
would be a great loss to me to have many such acquaintances. I dearly


love a laugh.”
“Miss Bingley,” said he, “has given me more credit than can be. The
wisest and the best of men—nay, the wisest and best of their actions—
may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a
joke.”
“Certainly,” replied Elizabeth—“there are such people, but I hope
I am not one of them. I hope I never ridicule what is wise and good.
Follies and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, do divert me, I own,
and I laugh at them whenever I can. But these, I suppose, are precisely
what you are without.”
“Perhaps that is not possible for anyone. But it has been the study
of my life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong understanding to ridicule.”
“Such as vanity and pride.”
“Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride—where there is a real
superiority of mind, pride will be always under good regulation.”
Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.
“Your examination of Mr. Darcy is over, I presume,” said Miss Bingley; “and pray what is the result?”
“I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has no defect. He
owns it himself without disguise.”
“No,” said Darcy, “I have made no such pretension. I have faults
enough, but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I dare
not vouch for. It is, I believe, too little yielding—certainly too little for
the convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of
other so soon as I ought, nor their offenses against myself. My feelings
are not puffed about with every attempt to move them. My temper
would perhaps be called resentful. My good opinion once lost, is lost
forever.”
“That is a failing indeed!” cried Elizabeth. “Implacable resentment
is a shade in a character. But you have chosen your fault well. I really
cannot laugh at it. You are safe from me.”
“There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particular evil—a natural defect, which not even the best education can
overcome.”
“And your defect is to hate everybody.”
“And yours,” he replied with a smile, “is willfully to misunderstand them.”
“Do let us have a little music,” cried Miss Bingley, tired of a conversation in which she had no share. “Louisa, you will not mind my
waking Mr. Hurst?”


Her sister had not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte was
opened; and Darcy, after a few moments’ recollection, was not sorry for
it. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention.


Chapter 13
“I hope, my dear,” said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they were at
breakfast the next morning, “that you have ordered a good dinner today, because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party.”
“Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I
am sure, unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in—and I hope
my dinners are good enough for her. I do not believe she often sees
such at home.”
“The person of whom I speak is a gentleman, and a stranger.”
Mrs. Bennet’s eyes sparkled. “A gentleman and a stranger! It is Mr.
Bingley, I am sure! Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr.
Bingley. But—good Lord! how unlucky! There is not a bit of fish to

be got to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell—I must speak to Hill this
moment.”
“It is not Mr. Bingley,” said her husband; “it is a person whom I
never saw in the whole course of my life.”
This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being eagerly questioned by his wife and his five daughters at once.
After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explained:
“About a month ago I received this letter; and about a fortnight ago
I answered it, for I thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiring
early attention. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who, when I am
dead, may turn you all out of this house as soon as he pleases.”
“Oh! my dear,” cried his wife, “I cannot bear to hear that mentioned. Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is the hardest
thing in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your
own children; and I am sure, if I had been you, I should have tried long
ago to do something or other about it.”
Jane and Elizabeth tried to explain to her the nature of an entail.
They had often attempted to do it before, but it was a subject on which
Mrs. Bennet was beyond the reach of reason, and she continued to rail
bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family
of five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything
about.
“It certainly is a most iniquitous affair,” said Mr. Bennet, “and nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn. But if
you will listen to his letter, you may perhaps be a little softened by his
manner of expressing himself.”
“No, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it is very impertinent
of him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I hate such false
friends. Why could he not keep on quarreling with you, as his father
did before him?”
“Why, indeed; he does seem to have had some filial scruples on that
head, as you will hear.”
“Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent,
15th October.
“Dear Sir,—
“The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured father always gave me much uneasiness, and since I have had
the misfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the breach;
but for some time I was kept back by my own doubts, fearing lest it

might seem disrespectful to his memory for me to be on good terms
with anyone with whom it had always pleased him to be at variance.—
’There, Mrs. Bennet.’—My mind, however, is now made up on the subject, for having received ordination at Easter, I have been so fortunate
as to be distinguished by the patronage of the Right Honourable Lady
Catherine de Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh, whose bounty
and beneficence has preferred me to the valuable rectory of this parish,
where it shall be my earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those
rites and ceremonies which are instituted by the Church of England.
As a clergyman, moreover, I feel it my duty to promote and establish
the blessing of peace in all families within in the reach of my influence; and on these grounds I flatter myself that my present overtures
are highly commendable, and that the circumstance of my being next
in the entail of Longbourn estate will be kindly overlooked on your
side, and not lead you to reject the offered olive-branch. I cannot be
otherwise than concerned at being the means of injuring your amiable
daughters, and beg leave to apologise for it, as well as to assure you of
my readiness to make them every possible amends—but of this hereafter. If you should have no objection to receive me into your house,
I propose myself the satisfaction of waiting on you and your family,
Monday, November 18th, by four o’clock, and shall probably trespass
on your hospitality till the Saturday se’ennight following, which I can
do without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine is far from objecting
to my occasional absence on a Sunday, provided that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day.—I remain, dear sir, with
respectful compliments to your lady and daughters, your well-wisher
and friend,
“William Collins”
“At four o’clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,” said Mr. Bennet, as he folded up the letter. “He seems to be a
most conscientious and polite young man, upon my word, and I doubt
not will prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine
should be so indulgent as to let him come to us again.”
“There is some sense in what he says about the girls, however, and
if he is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to
discourage him.”
“Though it is difficult,” said Jane, “to guess in what way he can
mean to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly
to his credit.”

Elizabeth was chiefly struck by his extraordinary deference for
Lady Catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and
burying his parishioners whenever it were required.
“He must be an oddity, I think,” said she. “I cannot make him
out.—There is something very pompous in his style.—And what can
he mean by apologising for being next in the entail?—We cannot suppose he would help it if he could.—Could he be a sensible man, sir?”
“No, my dear, I think not. I have great hopes of finding him quite
the reverse. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his
letter, which promises well. I am impatient to see him.”
“In point of composition,” said Mary, “the letter does not seem defective. The idea of the olive-branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet I
think it is well expressed.”
To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in any
degree interesting. It was next to impossible that their cousin should
come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour. As for
their mother, Mr. Collins’s letter had done away much of her ill-will,
and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure which
astonished her husband and daughters.
Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great
politeness by the whole family. Mr. Bennet indeed said little; but the
ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in
need of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was a
tall, heavy-looking young man of five-and-twenty. His air was grave
and stately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been long
seated before he complimented Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family
of daughters; said he had heard much of their beauty, but that in this
instance fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did not
doubt her seeing them all in due time disposed of in marriage. This
gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Mrs.
Bennet, who quarreled with no compliments, answered most readily.
“You are very kind, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may
prove so, for else they will be destitute enough. Things are settled so
oddly.”
“You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate.”
“Ah! sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you
must confess. Not that I mean to find fault with you, for such things
I know are all chance in this world. There is no knowing how estates
will go when once they come to be entailed.”
“I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins,
and could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing
forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I come
prepared to admire them. At present I will not say more; but, perhaps,
when we are better acquainted—”
He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled
on each other. They were not the only objects of Mr. Collins’s admiration. The hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined
and praised; and his commendation of everything would have touched
Mrs. Bennet’s heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing
it all as his own future property. The dinner too in its turn was highly
admired; and he begged to know to which of his fair cousins the excellency of its cooking was owing. But he was set right there by Mrs.
Bennet, who assured him with some asperity that they were very well
able to keep a good cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in
the kitchen. He begged pardon for having displeased her. In a softened tone she declared herself not at all offended; but he continued to
apologise for about a quarter of an hour.



Chapter 15
Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature
had been but little assisted by education or society; the greatest part
of his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and
miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he
had merely kept the necessary terms, without forming at it any useful
acquaintance. The subjection in which his father had brought him up
had given him originally great humility of manner; but it was now a
good deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected prosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine
de Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect
which he felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness, mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority
as a clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture
of pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility.
Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended to marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn
family he had a wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the
daughters, if he found them as handsome and amiable as they were
represented by common report. This was his plan of amends—of
atonement—for inheriting their father’s estate; and he thought it an
excellent one, full of eligibility and suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own part.
His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet’s lovely face
confirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of what
was due to seniority; and for the first evening she was his settled choice.
The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a quarter of an
hour’s tete-a-tete with Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, a conversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and leading naturally to the avowal
of his hopes, that a mistress might be found for it at Longbourn, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general encouragement, a caution against the very Jane he had fixed on. “As to her
younger daughters, she could not take upon her to say—she could not
positively answer—but she did not know of any prepossession; her eldest daughter, she must just mention—she felt it incumbent on her to
hint, was likely to be very soon engaged.”

Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth—and it was
soon done—done while Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire. Elizabeth,
equally next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.
Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon
have two daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to
speak of the day before was now high in her good graces.
Lydia’s intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten; every
sister except Mary agreed to go with her; and Mr. Collins was to attend them, at the request of Mr. Bennet, who was most anxious to
get rid of him, and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins
had followed him after breakfast; and there he would continue, nominally engaged with one of the largest folios in the collection, but really
talking to Mr. Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at
Hunsford. Such doings discomposed Mr. Bennet exceedingly. In his
library he had been always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though
prepared, as he told Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every
other room of the house, he was used to be free from them there; his
civility, therefore, was most prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join his
daughters in their walk; and Mr. Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walker than a reader, was extremely pleased to close his large
book, and go.
In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of his
cousins, their time passed till they entered Meryton. The attention
of the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by him. Their
eyes were immediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers, and nothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed, or a really new
muslin in a shop window, could recall them.
But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man,
whom they had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance,
walking with another officer on the other side of the way. The officer
was the very Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia
came to inquire, and he bowed as they passed. All were struck with
the stranger’s air, all wondered who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia, determined if possible to find out, led the way across the street,
under pretense of wanting something in an opposite shop, and fortunately had just gained the pavement when the two gentlemen, turning
back, had reached the same spot. Mr. Denny addressed them directly,
and entreated permission to introduce his friend, Mr. Wickham, who
had returned with him the day before from town, and he was happy
to say had accepted a commission in their corps. This was exactly as
it should be; for the young man wanted only regimentals to make him

completely charming. His appearance was greatly in his favour; he had
all the best part of beauty, a fine countenance, a good figure, and very
pleasing address. The introduction was followed up on his side by
a happy readiness of conversation—a readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming; and the whole party were still standing
and talking together very agreeably, when the sound of horses drew
their notice, and Darcy and Bingley were seen riding down the street.
On distinguishing the ladies of the group, the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and began the usual civilities. Bingley was the
principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet the principal object. He was
then, he said, on his way to Longbourn on purpose to inquire after her.
Mr. Darcy corroborated it with a bow, and was beginning to determine
not to fix his eyes on Elizabeth, when they were suddenly arrested by
the sight of the stranger, and Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as they looked at each other, was all astonishment at the
effect of the meeting. Both changed colour, one looked white, the other
red. Mr. Wickham, after a few moments, touched his hat—a salutation
which Mr. Darcy just deigned to return. What could be the meaning of
it? It was impossible to imagine; it was impossible not to long to know.
In another minute, Mr. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what passed, took leave and rode on with his friend.
Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the
door of Mr. Phillip’s house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss
Lydia’s pressing entreaties that they should come in, and even in spite
of Mrs. Phillips’s throwing up the parlour window and loudly seconding the invitation.
Mrs. Phillips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest,
from their recent absence, were particularly welcome, and she was eagerly expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, which, as
their own carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothing about, if she had not happened to see Mr. Jones’s shop-boy in the
street, who had told her that they were not to send any more draughts
to Netherfield because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her
civility was claimed towards Mr. Collins by Jane’s introduction of him.
She received him with her very best politeness, which he returned with
as much more, apologising for his intrusion, without any previous acquaintance with her, which he could not help flattering himself, however, might be justified by his relationship to the young ladies who
introduced him to her notice. Mrs. Phillips was quite awed by such
an excess of good breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was
soon put to an end by exclamations and inquiries about the other; of


whom, however, she could only tell her nieces what they already knew,
that Mr. Denny had brought him from London, and that he was to have
a lieutenant’s commission in the ——shire. She had been watching him
the last hour, she said, as he walked up and down the street, and had
Mr. Wickham appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the occupation, but unluckily no one passed windows now except
a few of the officers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become “stupid, disagreeable fellows.” Some of them were to dine with
the Phillipses the next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr. Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn would come in the evening. This was agreed to,
and Mrs. Phillips protested that they would have a nice comfortable
noisy game of lottery tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards.
The prospect of such delights was very cheering, and they parted in
mutual good spirits. Mr. Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the
room, and was assured with unwearying civility that they were perfectly needless.
As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen
pass between the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended either or both, had they appeared to be in the wrong, she could
no more explain such behaviour than her sister.
Mr. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet by admiring
Mrs. Phillips’s manners and politeness. He protested that, except Lady
Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman;
for she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but even
pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, although
utterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might be attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so
much attention in the whole course of his life.


Chapter 17
Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between Mr.
Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern;
she knew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy
of Mr. Bingley’s regard; and yet, it was not in her nature to question
the veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham.
The possibility of his having endured such unkindness, was enough to
interest all her tender feelings; and nothing remained therefore to be
done, but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each,
and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not
be otherwise explained.
“They have both,” said she, “been deceived, I dare say, in some
way or other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have
perhaps misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for
us to conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated
them, without actual blame on either side.”
“Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to
say on behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the business? Do clear them too, or we shall be obliged to
think ill of somebody.”
“Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of
my opinion. My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful
light it places Mr. Darcy, to be treating his father’s favourite in such a
manner, one whom his father had promised to provide for. It is impossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for
his character, could be capable of it. Can his most intimate friends be
so excessively deceived in him? Oh! no.”
“I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley’s being imposed on,
than that Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he
gave me last night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If it be not so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was

truth in his looks.”
“It is difficult indeed—it is distressing. One does not know what to
think.”
“I beg your pardon; one knows exactly what to think.”
But Jane could think with certainty on only one point—that Mr.
Bingley, if he had been imposed on, would have much to suffer when
the affair became public.
The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where
this conversation passed, by the arrival of the very persons of whom
they had been speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their
personal invitation for the long-expected ball at Netherfield, which
was fixed for the following Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted
to see their dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and
repeatedly asked what she had been doing with herself since their separation. To the rest of the family they paid little attention; avoiding
Mrs. Bennet as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and
nothing at all to the others. They were soon gone again, rising from
their seats with an activity which took their brother by surprise, and
hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mrs. Bennet’s civilities.
The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to
every female of the family. Mrs. Bennet chose to consider it as given
in compliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly flattered
by receiving the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself, instead of a ceremonious card. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the society
of her two friends, and the attentions of her brother; and Elizabeth
thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr. Wickham, and
of seeing a confirmation of everything in Mr. Darcy’s look and behavior. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended less
on any single event, or any particular person, for though they each,
like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham, he
was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ball
was, at any rate, a ball. And even Mary could assure her family that
she had no disinclination for it.
“While I can have my mornings to myself,” said she, “it is enough—
I think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements.
Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of those who
consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for everybody.”
Elizabeth’s spirits were so high on this occasion, that though she
did not often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, she could not help
asking him whether he intended to accept Mr. Bingley’s invitation, and


if he did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening’s
amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained
no scruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a
rebuke either from the Archbishop, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by
venturing to dance.
“I am by no means of the opinion, I assure you,” said he, “that a
ball of this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable
people, can have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to
dancing myself, that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all
my fair cousins in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity
of soliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially, a
preference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right cause,
and not to any disrespect for her.”
Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully proposed
being engaged by Mr. Wickham for those very dances; and to have Mr.
Collins instead! her liveliness had never been worse timed. There was
no help for it, however. Mr. Wickham’s happiness and her own were
perforce delayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins’s proposal accepted
with as good a grace as she could. She was not the better pleased with
his gallantry from the idea it suggested of something more. It now
first struck her, that she was selected from among her sisters as worthy
of being mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a
quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors. The
idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasing civilities toward herself, and heard his frequent attempt at a compliment on
her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than gratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long before her mother gave
her to understand that the probability of their marriage was extremely
agreeable to her. Elizabeth, however, did not choose to take the hint,
being well aware that a serious dispute must be the consequence of
any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, and till he did, it
was useless to quarrel about him.
If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the
younger Miss Bennets would have been in a very pitiable state at this
time, for from the day of the invitation, to the day of the ball, there was
such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Meryton once.
No aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after—the very shoeroses for Netherfield were got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have
found some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended
the improvement of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing
less than a dance on Tuesday, could have made such a Friday, Saturday,


Sunday, and Monday endurable to Kitty and Lydia.



Chapter 19
The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins made
his declaration in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of time,
as his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and
having no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even
at the moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the
observances, which he supposed a regular part of the business. On
finding Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together,
soon after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words:
“May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth, when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in
the course of this morning?”
Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs.
Bennet answered instantly, “Oh dear!—yes—certainly. I am sure Lizzy
will be very happy—I am sure she can have no objection. Come, Kitty,
I want you upstairs.” And, gathering her work together, she was hastening away, when Elizabeth called out:
“Dear madam, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must
excuse me. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not
hear. I am going away myself.”
“No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you to stay where you are.” And
upon Elizabeth’s seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks,
about to escape, she added: “Lizzy, I insist upon your staying and hearing Mr. Collins.”
Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction—and a moment’s
consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get it
over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again and tried
to conceal, by incessant employment the feelings which were divided
between distress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and
as soon as they were gone, Mr. Collins began.
“Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from
doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other perfections. You

would have been less amiable in my eyes had there not been this little
unwillingness; but allow me to assure you, that I have your respected
mother’s permission for this address. You can hardly doubt the purport of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to
dissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as soon as I entered the house, I singled you out as the companion of my future life. But before I am run away with by my feelings on
this subject, perhaps it would be advisable for me to state my reasons
for marrying—and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the
design of selecting a wife, as I certainly did.”
The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run
away with by his feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing, that she
could not use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him
further, and he continued:
“My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing for
every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the example of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced that it
will add very greatly to my happiness; and thirdly—which perhaps
I ought to have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and
recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of
calling patroness. Twice has she condescended to give me her opinion
(unasked too!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturday night
before I left Hunsford—between our pools at quadrille, while Mrs.
Jenkinson was arranging Miss de Bourgh’s footstool, that she said, ‘Mr.
Collins, you must marry. A clergyman like you must marry. Choose
properly, choose a gentlewoman for my sake; and for your own, let her
be an active, useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to
make a small income go a good way. This is my advice. Find such
a woman as soon as you can, bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit
her.’ Allow me, by the way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not
reckon the notice and kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among
the least of the advantages in my power to offer. You will find her
manners beyond anything I can describe; and your wit and vivacity,
I think, must be acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the
silence and respect which her rank will inevitably excite. Thus much
for my general intention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told
why my views were directed towards Longbourn instead of my own
neighbourhood, where I can assure you there are many amiable young
women. But the fact is, that being, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured father (who, however, may live many
years longer), I could not satisfy myself without resolving to choose a

wife from among his daughters, that the loss to them might be as little
as possible, when the melancholy event takes place—which, however,
as I have already said, may not be for several years. This has been my
motive, my fair cousin, and I flatter myself it will not sink me in your
esteem. And now nothing remains but for me but to assure you in the
most animated language of the violence of my affection. To fortune I
am perfectly indifferent, and shall make no demand of that nature on
your father, since I am well aware that it could not be complied with;
and that one thousand pounds in the four per cents, which will not be
yours till after your mother’s decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. On that head, therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you
may assure yourself that no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my
lips when we are married.”
It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now.
“You are too hasty, sir,” she cried. “You forget that I have made no
answer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my thanks for
the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the honour
of your proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than to
decline them.”
“I am not now to learn,” replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave
of the hand, “that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses
of the man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first applies
for their favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second,
or even a third time. I am therefore by no means discouraged by what
you have just said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long.”
“Upon my word, sir,” cried Elizabeth, “your hope is a rather extraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am not one of
those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so daring
as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second time.
I am perfectly serious in my refusal. You could not make me happy,
and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world who could
make you so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I
am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for the
situation.”
“Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so,” said Mr.
Collins very gravely—“but I cannot imagine that her ladyship would
at all disapprove of you. And you may be certain when I have the honour of seeing her again, I shall speak in the very highest terms of your
modesty, economy, and other amiable qualification.”
“Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You must
give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment of be-


lieving what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and by refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise. In
making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbourn
estate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter may be
considered, therefore, as finally settled.” And rising as she thus spoke,
she would have quitted the room, had Mr. Collins not thus addressed
her:
“When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, I shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have
now given me; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present,
because I know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a
man on the first application, and perhaps you have even now said as
much to encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the female character.”
“Really, Mr. Collins,” cried Elizabeth with some warmth, “you puzzle me exceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in
the form of encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in
such a way as to convince you of its being one.”
“You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that your
refusal of my addresses is merely words of course. My reasons for believing it are briefly these: It does not appear to me that my hand is
unworthy your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer would
be any other than highly desirable. My situation in life, my connections with the family of de Bourgh, and my relationship to your own,
are circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into
further consideration, that in spite of your manifold attractions, it is by
no means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you.
Your portion is unhappily so small that it will in all likelihood undo the
effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I must therefore conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me, I shall
choose to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love by suspense,
according to the usual practice of elegant females.”
“I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to that
kind of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man. I
would rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. I thank
you again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but to accept them is absolutely impossible. My feelings in every
respect forbid it. Can I speak plainer? Do not consider me now as
an elegant female, intending to plague you, but as a rational creature,
speaking the truth from her heart.”


“You are uniformly charming!” cried he, with an air of awkward
gallantry; “and I am persuaded that when sanctioned by the express
authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail of
being acceptable.”
To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would
make no reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined,
if he persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flattering encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered in
such a manner as to be decisive, and whose behavior at least could not
be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.


